&copy; Copyright Kirk Rader 2023. All rights reserved.

# Quantum Physicists Just Need to Get Over It

Almost daily, in certain corners of the media, yet another blog post, TV show,
book or pop-sci magazine article is full of breathlessly overblown descriptions
of how weird and brain-breaking Quantum Physics is including quotes from
Professional Physicists explaining how Everything We Believe About the Nature of
Reality Is Wrong!

Let's all just calm down.

A century ago, when the field of Quantum Physics was new and burgeoning,
physicists might have been excused for reacting to its discoveries with shock
and even disbelief. It took no lesser mind than that of Albert Einstein, who had
pioneered the idea of treating photons as quanta of light, quite a while to
fully internalize some of Quantum Physics impossible-to-predict-in-advance
results, particularly indeterminacy and entanglement. But consider that Einstein
along with the originators of Quantum Mechanics like Bohrs were born firmly
within the Victorian Age. Universal electrification of cities was still a work
in progress when they were students. Steam power was still in use in non-trivial
ways when they were working at the height of their intellectual powers.

But what is so shocking, really? It turns out that billiard balls are made out
of stuff at the sub-atomic level that does not behave exactly like a bunch of
little tiny billiard balls. Stop the presses! Reality doesn't exist!

Would it not have been more surprising and metaphysically disturbing if the
"particles" of particle physics actually did behave substantially like, well,
particles? That would suggest an infinite regress of sub-sub-sub-atomic
particles, each being very particle-like, to the power of negative infinity and
that really would be hard to reconcile with common sense. As it is, chunks of
macroscopic matter have different properties than molecules, molecules have
different properties than atoms, atoms have different properties than muons,
bosons and hadrons which, in turn, have different properties than quarks (which
is as far as my lay understanding goes and may be as far as it gets unless
someone figures out some way to experimentally test variations of M-theory or
the like).

Consider that mechanical clocks are not just collections of gears of particular
sizes, springs of particular lengths and flexibility and so on. Clocks are
collections of such bits and pieces arranged in very specific ways and
maintained in a very particular state. Disassemble a clock and you have all the
pieces of which a clock can be made, but none of those pieces on their own look
or behave anything like a clock. You cannot tell time by looking at a pile of
gears and springs, even if that pile is a disassmbled clock. You especially
cannot tell time just using a single gear on its own.

Electrons are among the constituent bits and pieces out of which ordinary matter
is made. They are too tiny to see on their own and travel too fast for us to
follow as they whiz past (when viewed as "particles") or wash about (when viewed
as "waves"), but a bunch of very clever people have figured out ways to perform
hard-to-explain experiments measuring their actions and interactions with the
other denizens of the "particle zoo." Human brains working the way they do, even
the most clever people need to start with some sort of mental framework when
trying to puzzle out completely new things. So, of course, phycists who were
steeped in classical mechanics &mdash; because that is the only kind there was
when science first became ready to tackle stuff at the quantum level &mdash;
started to categorize and interpret the results they got when they started
measuring the effects and properties of things like electrons by analogy to
classical mechanics. It is no surprise, then, that physicists may detect
particle-like and wave-like properties in things that are neither particles nor
waves using tools and techniques that can only ever measure indirectly some
specific aspect of a thing they can never, even in principle, see exactly for
what it is in the way we can literally see ordinary matter.

A billiard ball sitting on a level surface will sit in perfect stillness and
smug solidity when viewed at the scale at which human senses operate, right up
to the moment that some external force is applied that sends it rolling off in
some predictible direction, at some predictible speed according to Newton's
comfortably explicable laws. Because that is how well polished spheres of
lacquered wood behave. But dare zoom in far enough, pop-sci physics warns us,
and the ball is nothing but a seething cloud of mere probability that really
should not be said to exist at all and is in danger at any moment of dissolving
into a gamma ray burst or teleporting itself onto the surface of the moon. But
is that not like saying that the old proverb about the blind men and the
elephant means that elephants do not really exist but only wall-like things, and
tree-like things, and rope-like things, and snake-like things?

A far more sensible way of regarding the supposed "weirdness" of Quantum Physics
is that electrons behave like electrons, protons like protons etc. just as
billiard balls behave like billiard balls. It is a metaphysical red herring to
focus on the fact that the latter are made from the former. Since we cannot see
at the sub-atomic level directly, we perform experiments and take measurements
and construct mathematical models to describe the results. When we make the
mistake of taking our reasoning by analogy with stuff we actually can see too
seriously, our expectations are thwarted not because the behavior of stuff at
the sub-atomic level is inexplicably and even threateningly different from the
behavior of stuff made from that sub-atomic stuff, any more than the "reality"
of a clock is threatened by the fact that it is made from parts that are,
themselves, not at all clock-like.

A consequence is that apparent paradoxes like the "tail problem" are not
particularly problematic after all. Supposedly, quantum indeterminacy means that
there is always some chance, even if only an ultra microscopically small chance,
of some physical object acting in some observably non-classical way.

Ask any casino operator: that is not how probability actually works. If it did,
casinos would go out of business. As it is, they love nothing better than to
give out giant jackpots, because the marketing opportunities they represent are
built into their extremely profitable business model. Casinos know very well, in
advance, how much money they are going to give out over any given period of time
longer than the next few hours because their games of chance are designed to pay
out at a certain rate even while _not_ being rigged in the sense of outright
cheating. The chance of a casino going broke because it had to pay too many
jackpots all at once is transcendently higher than the chance of seeing some
billiard ball start rolling around on its own due to quantum indeterminacy. Do
not hold your breath wating to see either of those events in the real world.

More signficantly, the "tail problem" looks at the indeterminacy of an
individual particle and imagines that somehow that equates to even a very small
potential for indeterminacy at the macroscopic scale. But that relies on math
that treats probablities as points on the infinitely subdivisible number line.
That, in turn, ignores the quantum nature of reality, itself. The real problem
here is Physcists mistaking features of their mathematical models for features
of the stuff they are modeling.

In short, Physicists and pop-sci journalists would do well to leave Metaphysics
to the professionals in the Philosophy Department and just get on with the
business of calculating their wave functions, letting the rest of us in on the
interesting and useful stuff they discover along the way without all the
melodrama.
